here it pliers the trolley one in the
west coast of brittany to have a look at
the june system here and to think about
how the genes are formed what up to how
they're managed how people have an
effect on them
dunes well first of all to get a dune
form do you need three things to be in
place you need first of all you need
sand because without sand they would be
a jew you also need the space to put the
santur the accommodation space and then
you need the wind the weather conditions
to be able to pick up the sand to move
it and to deposit it and the way that
the sand is moved by it is by three
different methods mechanisms first one
is if the wind is strong enough you can
actually pick the sand up and blow it
along in suspension that we call
suspended transport
however if the wind isn't strong enough
to keep it in suspension then it may be
able to get the grains to hop up into
the air and then to bounce on the ground
again and they might pop up again in a
sort of a leapfrog sort of motion across
the beach and up into the dunes that's
something we call saltation and the
third mechanism by which they could move
is when the wind is just strong enough
to move it along the ground as a blanket
if you like we call surface creep now
when the sand is moving by anything any
one of those three mechanisms it will
only come to stop and be deposited when
the wind velocity was transporting it
decreases and that that can occur when
the sand encounters an obstacle like a
strand line at the back of the beach
composed of driftwood
seaweed maybe the odd dead dolphin also
and the sand can then be deposited in
the Leeside sometimes also on the upwind
side of the object to start creating an
accumulation of sand so what we call a
shadow June and at this point the shadow
June doesn't have any vegetation on it
it's just sand around a particular devil
piece of debris but if the sand
accumulates enough and it gets above the
the influence of the waves the
vegetation can actually start to
colonize that shadow June to produce
then what we call an embryo to
and an embryo tune can be a very small
round circular accumulation of sound
with a bit of an taffeta vegetation on
it centered on a piece of debris but
eventually if it's a longer strand line
these individual embryo Tunes through a
continued accumulation of sand and and
the increased trapping ability of the
vegetation they can actually start to
coalesce and to merge along the Strand
line so you have these emerging
coalescing embryo Tunes
which eventually produce a linear judy
feature and it occurs right at the front
of the dunes and because of that being
call it the four to nobody for gene has
been created you can have another strand
line be deposited by waves in front of
it and the whole whole process can start
all over link all over again producing
another 4g in front of the older forgery
and in this way if sediment supply is is
constant and continuous then we can have
a whole number whole series of logics
growing out seaward from the original
position and we call that process Jun
progradation so the dudes confirm raid
at sea in the sediment availability
smaranam
now once that happens the old 4g that's
left behind that becomes what we call
the Heinz Jun it's behind the politics
mind you and the fortune is the one at
the front now eventually with
progradation those hind dudes I've been
going to become more and more Evan
distant from the beach and the sorcerer
settlement so they become effectively
starved a settlement when that happens
they are vulnerable to an incision and
thus turbines passed by rabbits
burrowing like goats or sheep grazing
only tourists walking across the beach
across the tooth rather than to the
beach and in sizing pathways as we have
here when that happens the wind can
actually get into those pathways and
start to undercut the dune on the side
releasing the sand from underneath the
vegetation in which case we have here
Marin grasses and sedges
we play with
transported from the toon Ridge to
behind the fragment to the left and so
the whole Duke we reorient a different
what was parallel to the coast
to actually become perpendicular to the
coast and right angles and when that
happens we call those secondary Jews
because they're no longer in their
original orientation and of course when
they are in their original orientation
we call those primary Jews because
they're in their primary position so by
looking at from the air and a Jude
system the genes that are still parallel
to the coast
our primary genes those that we need be
orientated through stance and starvation
and blowout formation and undercutting
to deflation or the wind they become
perpendicular and they are the second
degree
so there's a whole evolutionary process
going on there with the sand dunes